=========================
Contributing to PyNitride
=========================

Getting started
=================
To get started, clone the repository and install the development dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/samueljamesbader/PyNitride.git

Set up your Python environment.  (This may differ on your system.)
e.g. Linux/Mac with a venv:

.. code-block:: bash

   cd PyNitride
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate

or  Windows with a venv in PowerShell:

.. code-block:: powershell

   cd PyNitride
   python -m venv venv
   .\venv\Scripts\activate

Then install the locked development dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install --upgrade pip
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   pip install -e ".[dev]" --no-deps

Dependency management
=======================
The dependencies are defined by ``pyproject.toml`` and locked in ``requirements.txt``.

To regenerate the locked dependencies after changing ``pyproject.toml``, run:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip-compile --extra dev -o requirements.txt pyproject.toml

(To update the dependencies to their latest versions, add an ``--upgrade`` flag, or e.g. ``--upgrade-package numpy`` to only upgrade a specific package.)


Then install the new dependencies with

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install -r requirements.txt

Tests
========
Tests include unit tests, literature value tests, and a set of example simulations that are run and compared to "golden" output files.

CI
************
The CI flow (`.github/workflows/ci.yml`) runs the unit tests and example tests on every push and pull request, and will fail if any of the tests fail.

Golden files
************
These golden files were generated by running the examples and saving the output, and are included in the repository in the ``tests/examples/goldens`` directory.
When adding a new example, you should create a test function for it in ``test_examples.py`` (under ``tests/examples/``) following the pattern of e.g. ``test_hemt_example()``.

Then to generate the golden file for a new example, you can simply run ``test_examples.py`` with the name of the example function, e.g. ``python test_examples.py test_hemt_example``.

Documentation
=============
The source files are in the ``sphinx/manual/`` directory.
The main file is ``index.rst``, which contains the root toctree for the manual.
You can add new pages to the manual by creating new .rst files and adding them to the toctree in ``index.rst``.

Building
************
The documentation is built using Sphinx, just run ``python sphinx\document.py``,
which will generate the API reference and build the HTML files in the ``docs/html/`` directory.

Deploying documentation
***********************
The CI flow (`.github/workflows/ci.yml`) deploys to GitHub Pages (settings `here <https://github.com/samueljamesbader/PyNitride/settings/pages>`_) when changes are pushed to the main branch.